Proposal for Backwards Compatibility (#11)
fairlearn/fairlearn-proposals: releases/ReleaseCompatibility.md

changes in Fairlearn.
Although we are currently pre-`v1.0.0` and hence without particular
commitments to compatibility (as generally understood - see e.g.
the [Semantic Versioning Scheme](https://semver.org/)), we should
work to reduce the number of breaking changes we make.

## The Problem

At the time of writing, we have just released `v0.4.6`, which has
some substantial breaking changes in the Metrics area of Fairlearn.
Before it, `v0.4.5` reworked a smaller subset of this functionality, 
caused smaller breakages.
There are also further changes to Metrics planned, which may well
cause further breaks (although these should be more minor).
All this is obviously undesirable from a user standpoint - these look
like 'patch' level releases, but are actually breaking their code.
Concretely, we've had users install Fairlearn with `pip`, and then
find themselves unable to run Notebooks from our GitHub project - not
because the functionality was missing, but because it had been
renamed.
Moving our notebooks to being generated as part of the documentation
[in our examples directory](https://github.com/fairlearn/fairlearn/tree/master/examples)

> will help with this, since this will result in the notebooks being

Reviewer: Not automatically. I skipped this part because it was making everything A LOT more complicated and I wanted to first get *something* up.

Author: Are we still expecting to have the automatic generation in place? I don't mind this doc talking about future things, so long as there's a reasonable prospect of 'future' becoming 'now' within a few weeks.

Reviewer: It wasn't on my list for the immediate future since it very much seemed non-trivial. If we want this we should probably spend an hour or two understanding what scikit-learn does for this, and then we should have an idea on how much work it actually is.

Author: Actually, I don't think the status of this move matters for this document, now that I have changed it to running the tests rather than the notebooks.

However, we do *not* guarantee compatibility between `n` and `n+1` in this scheme (although we would seek to minimise breakage).
If we have to do `v.n.m.post[i]` releases, we will only support the final `post` release in the chain.

In order to support less mature functionality, we should also add
a `fairlearn.experimental` package (see [a similar namespace in
SciKit-Learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#module-sklearn.experimental)).
Anything in there will be subject to breaking at any time.
Using an `experimental` namespace would not have helped with our
current set of breaks, since the changes were being made to core
functionality.
Rather, this is to give future developers a space where they can
get feedback on new functionality without immediately being
committed to supporting their speculative design decisions.

At the time of writing, it appears that the dashboard code does
not use namespaces.
However, namespaces are supported in TypeScript, and as we develop
the UX code, we should introduce a similar distinction.

> To monitor the required backwards compatibility, each new release

Reviewer: I read this three times now and I'm still confused. Each release will have a pipeline which "will run the tests associated with the release tag" AND "the build will only run against the last release". These seem to be contradicting each other.

I'd also like to not call these build pipeline anymore if they're just tests.

Author: I've tried rephrasing, to make it clearer. Let me know if this is better.

As for not calling things "build pipelines" ... given that this is Python, we never really _build_ anything. Are you suggesting that we change our nomenclature through out our documentation?

Reviewer: I think we've already moved away from the word "build" wherever possible (unless things are actually getting built like the docs or the widget)

Author: I've removed "build" from the text

will have a build pipeline associated with it.
This pipeline will run the *tests associated with the release tag*
against the version of Fairlearn in `master`.

> In keeping with the note about `post[i]` releases above, the build will only run against the last release in each release branch.

Reviewer: nit: line wrap

The build will become part of the PR Gate for `master`, except when
we are moving from `v0.n` to `v0.n+1`.

## Revised Branching and Release Policy

Our recent releases have been made from `master`, without
making a release branch.
While this approach has desirable properties, using release branches
will work better with the more robust support policy described above.

For all the `master` and `release` branches, we will require a linear
history in GitHub.
This forbids plain `merge` commits, and we will prefer squash merges
to rebases.

We will keep the `master` branch at `v0.m.n.dev0` at all times,
indicating that `master` is under active development (although we will
always seek to keep `master` in a shippable condition).
Releases will occur from branches.

> To create a new release:

Reviewer: We'll need to update the contributor guide accordingly as well

1. Create a branch `release/v.0.n.m`
1. Remove the `dev0` suffix from the version on the release branch
   - Bump `master` to `v0.n.m+1.dev0`
1. Run the release pipeline on the new release branch
1. Create a GitHub Release corresponding to the new package
   (hopefully this can be automated)
1. Create the new build pipeline to monitor backwards compatibility

### Post Releases

We should only put out `post[i]` releases for essential fixes (either
to algorithms or code) - no new features are allowed.
In general, fixes should be made in `master` and individually moved
to the appropriate release branch as required.

> The move will probably best be done with `git rebase -i`, in order to

Reviewer: Did you mean git cherry-pick?

Author: No - scikitlearn uses `git rebase -i` instead. I know that cherry-picking gave trouble before. I'm not sure if that was just my general ineptitude, or whether something more fundamental about it.

Reviewer 2: the `rebase` done in sklearn is a _reverse rebase_. A bit confusing, I know :D but it basically does the `git cherry-pick` :P

Author: When it comes to `git` phrases like "basically does the same" cause me a certain amount of trepidation....

It is possible that the issues I had with the early release were due to me working on a clone of Fairlearn and not a fork. For now, I've tried to explain a bit more, and put in a link to the `scikit-learn` doc. I feel that this might be something which is somewhat obscure until we actually try to do it.

Reviewer: ... and when we try it it would be great to document the explicit steps :-)

Thanks for your clarifications!

Author: I've added a note about doing the documentation once we're sure of the steps.

Before it, `v0.4.5` reworked a smaller subset of this functionality, which caused smaller breakages.
There are also further changes to Metrics planned, which may well cause further breaks (although these should be more minor).
All this is obviously undesirable from a user standpoint - these look like 'patch' level releases, but are actually breaking their code.
Concretely, we've had users install Fairlearn with `pip`, and then find themselves unable to run Notebooks from our GitHub project - not because the functionality was missing, but because it had been renamed.

We do not need deprecation policies as elaborate of those of [SciKit-Learn](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0023-backwards-compatibility.html) or [NumPy](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0023-backwards-compatibility.html) - indeed, policies such as those would be ridiculous given the size of our code and user bases.
However, we do need to start to move in that direction, or we will not be able to grow our user base due to chaos in the code.

## Proposed Solution

Starting with `v0.5.0` we should make a commitment that anything which works at `v0.n.m_0` will also work for `v0.n.m` so long as `m >= m_0`.

> 

Reviewer 3: This is very reasonable. I like this.

Reviewer: +1

Author: Perhaps something I should highlight in the text is that I'm not saying anything about `n` and `n+1` for support. I am anticipating breakages there (although we would try to minimise them).

We will enforce this using builds which run the notebooks currently in the repository against versions of Fairlearn published on PyPI.
We already have a build which checks that our notebooks can run against the latest published version of Fairlearn (due to the metrics changes, this build is a steady red); this would be an extension of that functionality.

> For full compliance with the above, we will have to devise a means of allowing each notebook to specify its `m_0`.

Reviewer 3: I have started creating informally formatted "headers" in notebooks. See: [UCI Credit-card Default notebook](https://github.com/fairlearn/fairlearn/blob/master/notebooks/Binary%20Classification%20with%20the%20UCI%20Credit-card%20Default%20Dataset.ipynb). I wonder if we can just include that information there and then extract it in test/notebooks?

Reviewer: We have that test/notebook directory with specific test cases per notebook anyway, so it seems easier to put that info there, unless you want users to see the versions that a notebook is compatible with (?) I could see some value in that as well.

Author: I'd tend towards putting the information in the notebook, and providing some Fairlearn method for doing a version check.

Author: Removed bit about using notebooks for testing. Just go for the tests instead.

Our notebooks do not provide comprehensive coverage of Fairlearn, but enforcing a constraint like this will be a dramatic improvement over the current situation (particularly since new users will likely try our notebooks first).

> In order to support less mature functionality, we should also add a `fairlearn.experimental` package (see [a similar namespace in SciKit-Learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#module-sklearn.experimental)).

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure we need this yet. I guess I wonder how much overhead this would be on the testing side (in terms of coding this up and then maintaining it) and what we might put into this subpackage.

Reviewer: I'm not opposed to `fairlearn.experimental` in general, although I don't think it would have solved any of our issues. We're reworking all the core parts and that's why we're causing issues right now. 

Scenarios for `fairlearn.experimental` in my view are:
- new mitigation techniques that we're trying out (e.g. for research purposes) and that we don't necessarily want users to actively use unless they're aware of the caveats
- let's say someone wants to replicate our charts in matplotlib, that may be very incomplete at first and may need some work to get in a state where there's enough functionality (but would be too much for a single PR)

This is specific to Python code, so this wouldn't be usable for the dashboard and adding new components, right?

Author: Yes, `fairlearn.experimental` certainly wouldn't have helped with our current refactorings. The idea is that going forward, it gives contributors somewhere to 'play' without getting stuck supporting their earlier poor choices (which are inevitable, since users always come up with ingenious ways of breaking things :-) ).

For the UX, I don't know remotely enough about TS to comment. Perhaps something similar could happen there.

I'd very much appreciate experiences from other open source projects here.

Author: TS does have namespaces, so I've added a note.

# Releases & Compatibility

To date, we have been somewhat cavalier about making breaking changes in Fairlearn.
Although we are currently pre-`v1.0.0` and hence without particular commitments to compatibility (as generally understood - see e.g. the [Semantic Versioning Scheme](https://semver.org/)), we should work to reduce the number of breaking changes we make.

## The Problem

At the time of writing, we are about to release `v0.4.6`, which has some substantial breaking changes in the Metrics area of Fairlearn.
Before it, `v0.4.5` reworked a smaller subset of this functionality, which caused smaller breakages.
There are also further changes to Metrics planned, which may well cause further breaks (although these should be more minor).
All this is obviously undesirable from a user standpoint - these look like 'patch' level releases, but are actually breaking their code.

> Concretely, we've had users install Fairlearn with `pip`, and then find themselves unable to run Notebooks from our GitHub project - not because the functionality was missing, but because it had been renamed.

Reviewer 2: This is an issue which is fixed with the versioned documentation and not letting users rely on notebooks from the main repo.

Author: I've added a note to that effect - although I'm sure people will still manage to download the wrong version.

As for concentrating the testing on the notebooks, I was thinking of that from a 'first user impression' perspective. The notebooks are where we're most likely to hit trouble.

(Although as you note below, we are wanting to move from notebooks to `examples` and we could just run the tests instead)

Author: I've changed the text to have the tests run, rather than just the notebooks.

> We do not need deprecation policies as elaborate of those of [SciKit-Learn](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0023-backwards-compatibility.html) or [NumPy](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0023-backwards-compatibility.html) - indeed, policies such as those would be ridiculous given the size of our code and user bases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We do not need deprecation policies as elaborate of those of [SciKit-Learn](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0023-backwards-compatibility.html) or [NumPy](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0023-backwards-compatibility.html) - indeed, policies such as those would be unreasonable for `fairlearn` given the size of our code and user bases.
```

it was a bit unclear to me.

Author: Fair point.

However, we do need to start to move in that direction, or we will not be able to grow our user base due to chaos in the code.

## Proposed Solution

Starting with `v0.5.0` we should make a commitment that anything which works at `v0.n.m_0` will also work for `v0.n.m` so long as `m >= m_0`.

> However, we do *not* guarantee compatibility between `n` and `n+1` in this scheme (although we would seek to minimise breakage).

Reviewer 2: this is what we have in sklearn as well.

> We will enforce this using builds which run the notebooks currently in the repository against versions of Fairlearn published on PyPI.

Reviewer 2: Aren't we moving away from notebooks?

This also has to do with release workflow. Here's a proposal: 

We could say `0.xx.y+1` is a _patch_ or _bug fix_ release to `0.xx.y`.
The `master` branch is `0.xx+1.dev0`, and therefore changes on master can be breaking backward compatibility.
Whenever we want to push a patch release out, we _backport_ the PRs which we'd like to include in `0.xx.y+1` from the master, into the branch for the release.

This also implies that there is a branch for at least each major release, and minor releases are tags on at different times on that branch. The different versions of the documentation are also generated from those branches.

In my experience checking for backward compatibility in reviews is not hard, and if we get used to caring about it, then it'll be fine. In terms of testing, if we really want to test against a different release, we could run the tests against a different release, instead of running the notebooks.

Author: > moving away from notebooks?

Yes.... I should at the very least rephrase to be about running things from the `examples` directory.

However, your point about just running the tests is also good. I may have been overly concerned about saving on CPU cycles.

@romanlutz and @MiroDudik , what do you think about the release and branching strategy @adrinjalali is proposing? It looks reasonable to me, but would be more overhead over what we're currently doing.

Author: I've updated the proposal, making it a lot closer to the procedure described by @adrinjalali above.

Reviewer: Re notebooks - yes! It's just not done yet. Perhaps we should prioritize it.

We're pre-1.0 so we can currently only mess with 0.*.*. The only way to distinguish major releases from minor ones is therefore this last level (patch level). Otherwise we'll jump from 0.5.0 to 0.6.0 to 0.7.0 rapidly. It's really impossible to tell for users whether 0.7.0 is a major change or not at that point, since everything is flat. So fort that reason I'm not a huge fan.

I agree with testing against releases, not just running notebooks. That was just a quick band aid.

Author: "Not a huge fan" of what exactly - there are a few things going on here. I think you're concerned that our breaking changes are going to result in us going through minor versions quickly?

Reviewer: I think I was confusing myself a little bit. I think it's important to have a consistent approach and this is one such approach. No objections.
